<strong>AWS TITLE:</strong> Earth Radio Occultation Data<br>
<strong>Open Data Bucket:</strong> earth-radio-occultation
January 22, 2021

<strong>Hi Level Material for yaml File</strong>

<strong>Description</strong>
<p>Earth radio occultation profiles the microwave index of refraction, temperature, pressure, and humidity of the atmosphere in the stratosphere and troposphere by measuring how the atmosphere bends rays transmitted by the satellites of the Global Navigation Satellite Systems and received using specialized receivers in low-Earth orbit. Calibrated level 1 data (<a href=https://cdaac-www.cosmic.ucar.edu/cdaac/cgi_bin/fileFormats.cgi?type=atmPhs>conPhs</a>) and level 2 retrievals (<a href=https://cdaac-www.cosmic.ucar.edu/cdaac/cgi_bin/fileFormats.cgi?type=atmPrf>atmPrf</a>, <a href=https://www.romsaf.org/romsaf_bufr.pdf>bfrPrf</a>) files are provided spanning many radio occultation missions as processed at the COSMIC DAAC, the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory/Caltech, and the Radio Occultation Meteorology Satellite Application Facility (ROM SAF) of EUMETSAT. </p>

<strong>Update Frequency</strong><br>
Monthly

<strong><i>License</i></strong><br>

<strong>Documentation</strong><br>
http://github.com/gnss-ro/aws-opendata

<strong>Managed By</strong><br>
AER<br>

<strong>Github Documentation</strong><br>
<strong><i>Background:</i></strong>
<p>Radio occultation (RO) is a remote sensing technique wherein a precisely timed microwave signal is transmitted outside an atmosphere, transects the atmosphere’s limb, and is received outside the atmosphere. The atmosphere refractively bends the signal as it passes through the limb, and the bending is measured as a Doppler phase shift in the frequency of the received signal. That information can be analytically inverted to profile the microwave index of refraction of the atmosphere at extremely high vertical resolution. This technique has provided some of the best information available for temperature and pressure in planetary atmospheres. 

Since 1995, the technique has been applied to the Earth’s atmosphere using the signals of the Global Positioning System (GPS) originally and currently the signals of many of the Global Navigation Satellite Systems such as GPS, the Russian GLONASS, the European GALILEO, and the Chinese BeiDou. Two salient and unique qualities of RO data is that it is capable of extremely high vertical resolution by virtue of phase-tracking GNSS signals and that it is capable of extraordinary overall accuracy by virtue of calibration against atomic clocks. Trends and anomalies in retrieved variables has proven to be mostly independent of the retrieval algorithm. 
Demonstrating this requires inter-comparison of retrieved products from different retrieval centers. Three of the world’s major RO retrieval centers are represented in the AWS OpenData data set: the <a href=https://cdaac-www.cosmic.ucar.edu/>CDAAC</a> (ucar), the NASA <a href=https://genesis.jpl.nasa.gov/genesis/>Jet Propulsion Laboratory</a>/Caltech (jpl), and the <a href=https://genesis.jpl.nasa.gov/genesis/>Radio Occultation Meteorology Satellite Application Facility</a> of EUMETSAT (romsaf). 

Three file types are provided in this archive: calibrated excess phase (conPhs, a level 1b product); profiles of retrieved refractivity, which is the microwave index of refraction less 1 in parts per million (atmPrf, a level 2a product); and RO data in BUFR format as assimilated at numerical weather prediction centers worldwide (bfrPrf, a level 2b product). The CDAAC and JPL have provided all formats for most RO missions; the ROM SAF has provided only the atmPrf and bfrPrf formats for a select few RO missions. (The ROM SAF the conPhs files generated by UCAR as the basis for its retrievals.) 

Comprehensive descriptions of these data types are available at the CDAAC for <a href="https://cdaac-www.cosmic.ucar.edu/cdaac/cgi_bin/fileFormats.cgi?type=conPhs">conPhs</a>, <a href="https://cdaac-www.cosmic.ucar.edu/cdaac/cgi_bin/fileFormats.cgi?type=atmPrf">atmPrf</a>, and <a href="https://cdaac-www.cosmic.ucar.edu/cdaac/cgi_bin/fileFormats.cgi?type=bfrPrf">bfrPrf</a>. A few variables have been added to these data types. The geopotential height, which is the natural independent vertical coordinate for RO retrieval, has been added to the atmPrf format. Moreover, the formats have undergone modification over time. The conPhs format, for example, contains the precise orbits of the transmitting and receiving satellites, the amplitude of the received signal in the form of signal-to-noise ratio, and the calibrated phase of the received signal. In earlier RO missions, however, a bit stream that modulates the transmitted signal contained a navigation message that was not removed directly in signal processing. Some algorithms removed this navigation bit stream using detection algorithms in data processing, a technique that performed well in strong signal conditions but less well in weak signal conditions. This was the case for GPS/MET and CHAMP, for example. Later missions removed the navigation bit stream from the received signal using data on the same navigation bit streams as observed using ground-based GNSS receivers. This was the case for COSMIC and its contemporary and succeeding RO missions. Consequently, it is likely that conPhs may perform differently for earlier and later RO missions. </p>

<strong><i>Data Access:</i></strong>
<p>The conPhs, atmPrf, and bfrPrf files contributed by the member RO processing centers are found in the AWS OpenData S3 bucket in the path defined below: 
<strong>     contributed/center/mission/filetype/yyyy/mm/dd/filetype_mission_center_version_occid.suffix</strong>
The terms in this path are defined in Table 1. Mission mnemonics “<strong>mission</strong>” and the mission name are defined in Table 2. The occultation ID (<strong>occid</strong>) is defined as <strong>ttt-leo-yyyymmddhhnn</strong>. The transmitting satellite <strong>ttt</strong> is the standard identification of the GNSS satellites: <strong>SII</strong>, with <strong>S</strong> identifying the system (G for GPS, R for GLONASS, E for GALILEO, C for BeiDou) and <strong>II</strong> identifying the PRN of the transmitting satellite. For example, G05 is GPS satellite PRN 5, R12 is GLONASS satellite in slot 12, etc. The time string <strong>yyyymmddhhnn</strong> defines the time at which the tracking the occultation, which can last up to 3 minutes, rounded down to the minute. 

The contributed data can be accessed directly through “aws s3” command line operations and through python “boto3” services. For example, in linux one can download all atmPrf data as processed at JPL for the CHAMP mission on March 4, 2003, to the current directory using the following aws s3 command: <br>

<i>aws s3 copy s3://earth-radio-occultation/contributed/jpl/champ/atmPrf/2003/03/04/ ./ --exclude “*” --include “atmPrf*.nc”</i>

Likewise, a user can read the first conPhs file for COSMIC on December 10, 2010, as generated by UCAR CDAAC in python using boto3. The program would look like the following: 
<br><br><i>import boto3, netCDF4
<br>s3 = boto3.resource( “s3” )<br>
awsbucket = s3.Bucket( “earth-radio-occultation” )</i>
</p>

<strong>Table 1</strong>

<br>

<strong>Table 2</strong>
